Feat: overview + changelog for ACME plugin (#429)
Kong/developer.konghq.com: app/_kong_plugins/acme/index.md

categories:
  - security
  - certificates

search_aliases:
  - let's encrypt
  - certificates
---

> The ACME plugin allows {{site.base_gateway}} to apply certificates from Let's Encrypt or any other ACMEv2 service and serve them dynamically. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ACME plugin allows {{site.base_gateway}} to apply certificates from Let's Encrypt or any other ACMEv2 service and serve them dynamically. These certificates are used to serve TLS requests.
```

You can also configure a threshold time for automatic renewal. 

## How it works

The ACME plugin uses the [HTTP-01 challenge](https://letsencrypt.org/docs/challenge-types/), which lets you verify domain ownership before issuing an SSL certificate. 
The plugin generates a challenge token and key thumbprint, then presents them to Let's Encrypt or another ACMEv2 service when requested.

To use this plugin, you need:
* A public IP and a resolvable DNS

> * This challenge can only be done on port 80, so {{site.base_gateway}} needs to accept proxy traffic this port

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* This challenge can only be done on port 80, so {{site.base_gateway}} needs to accept proxy traffic this port. You can configure this with `proxy_listen` in kong.conf.
```
I think this is correct, at least I learned it from https://docs.konghq.com/gateway/3.9.x/reference/configuration/#proxy_listen

> Wildcard or star (`*`) certificates are not supported. Each domain must have its

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wildcard (`*`) certificates are not supported. Each domain must have its
```

own certificate.

**This plugin can only be configured as a global plugin.** 
The plugin terminates the `/.well-known/acme-challenge/` path for matching domains. 
To create certificates and terminate challenges only for certain domains, refer to the [configuration reference](/plugins/acme/reference/).

{:.info}
> **Serverless Gateways**: This plugin is not supported in serverless gateways because the
 TLS handshake doesn't occur at the {{site.base_gateway}} layer in this setup. 

### Running with or without a database

In a database-backed deployment, the plugin creates an SNI and certificate entity in {{site.base_gateway}} to
serve the certificate. If the SNI or certificate for the current request is already set
in the database, it will be overwritten.

In DB-less mode, the plugin takes over certificate handling. If the SNI or
certificate entity is already defined in {{site.base_gateway}}, it will be overridden by the

> response.

Author: Yes, that ^

### Supported storage types

The ACME plugin needs a backend storage to store certificates, challenge tokens, and key thumbprints.

You can set the backend storage for the plugin using the [`config.storage`](/plugins/acme/reference/#config-storage) parameter.
The backend storage available depends on the [topology](/gateway/deployment-models/) of your {{site.base_gateway}} environment: 

> Storage type | Description   | Traditional mode | Hybrid mode | DB-less | {{site.konnect_short_name}}
> -------------|---------------|------------------|-------------|---------|----------------------------
> `shm` | Lua shared dict storage. <br> This storage is volatile between Nginx restarts (not reloads). | ✅ | ❌ | ✅ | ❌
> `kong`| {{site.base_gateway}} database storage. | ✅ | ✅ <sup>1</sup> | ❌ | ❌
> `redis` | [Redis-based](https://redis.io/docs/latest/) storage.  | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ | ✅
> `consul` | [HashiCorp Consul](https://www.consul.io/) storage. | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ | ✅
> `vault` | [HashiCorp Vault](https://www.vaultproject.io/) storage. <br> _Only the [KV V2](https://www.vaultproject.io/api/secret/kv/kv-v2.html) backend is supported._ | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ | ✅

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% feature_table %}
item_title: Storage type
columns:
  - title: Description
    key: description
  - title: Traditional mode
    key: traditional
  - title: Hybrid mode
    key: hybrid
  - title: DB-less
    key: dbless
  - title: "{{site.konnect_short_name}}"
    key: konnect

features:
  - title: `shm`
    description: "Lua shared dict storage. This storage is volatile between Nginx restarts (not reloads)."
    traditional: true
    hybrid: false
    dbless: true
    konnect: false
  - title: `kong`<sup>1</sup>
    description: "{{site.base_gateway}} database storage."
    traditional: true
    hybrid: true
    dbless: false
    konnect: false
  - title: `redis`
    description: "[Redis-based](https://redis.io/docs/latest/) storage."
    traditional: true
    hybrid: true
    dbless: true
    konnect: true
  - title: `consul`
    description: "[HashiCorp Consul](https://www.consul.io/) storage."
    traditional: true
    hybrid: true
    dbless: true
    konnect: true
  - title: `vault`
    description: "[HashiCorp Vault](https://www.vaultproject.io/) storage. Only the [KV V2](https://www.vaultproject.io/api/secret/kv/kv-v2.html) backend is supported."
    traditional: true
    hybrid: true
    dbless: true
    konnect: true
{% endfeature_table %}
```
I think this should work, but double check spacing and that the description/titles render correctly.

Author: I forgot this table type existed 😅 thanks for converting.

> {:.info}
> > **\[1\]**: Due to current the limitations of hybrid mode, `kong` storage only supports certificate generation from
> the Admin API but not the proxy side, as the data planes don't have access to the {{site.base_gateway}} database. 
> See the [hybrid mode workflow](#hybrid-mode-workflow) for details. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{:.info}
> **\[1\]**: Due to the current limitations of hybrid mode, `kong` storage only supports certificate generation from
the Admin API but not the proxy side, as the data planes don't have access to the {{site.base_gateway}} database. 
See the [hybrid mode workflow](#hybrid-mode-workflow) for details. 
```

    client->>kong: Proxy or Admin API request <br> for example-domain.com
    kong->>acme: Start validation for example-domain.com
    note left of acme: example-domain.com is <br> publicly resolvable to {{site.base_gateway}}
    acme->>kong: Return challenge response detail
    acme-->>kong: Check challenge response at example-domain.com
    kong->>storage: Store challenge response
    kong-->>acme: Check challenge status
    acme->>kong: Download SSL certificate
    kong->>storage: Stores new SSL certificates
    storage-->>kong: Read from external storage for TLS requests
{% endmermaid %}

<!--vale on-->

## Renewing certificates

The plugin runs daily checks and automatically renews all certificates that
will expire in less than the configured `config.renew_threshold_days` value. If the renewal
of an individual certificate throws an error, the plugin will continue renewing the
other certificates. It will try renewing all certificates, including those that previously
failed, once per day. 

Renewal configuration is stored in the configured storage backend.
If the storage is cleared or modified outside of {{site.base_gateway}}, renewal might not complete properly.

> You can also actively trigger the renewal. The following request
> schedules a renewal in the background and returns immediately:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also actively trigger the renewal by sending the following request that schedules a renewal in the background:
```

```bash
curl http://localhost:8001/acme -XPATCH
```

## Switching storage types

{{site.base_gateway}} tracks SSL certificates in the defined storage type only.
For example, if the storage type is set to `kong`, the certificates and their renewal configuration will be stored in the {{site.base_gateway}} database.

If you change the storage type, the previous configuration will be lost. 
For example, if you have the storage type set to  `kong` and change it to `redis`, all certificates that were tracked for renewal when using the Kong DB for storage will no longer be tracked and renewed automatically. 

When switching between storage types, we recommend deleting existing certificates.

You can see what certificates {{site.base_gateway}} is currently is aware of using the `/acme/certificates` endpoint of the Admin API.

## EAB support

The ACME plugin supports external account binding (EAB) with the `config.eab_kid` and `config.eab_hmac_key` values.

> If using [ZeroSSL](https://zerossl.com/), the provider's external account can be registered automatically, without specifying the KID or HMAC key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're using [ZeroSSL](https://zerossl.com/), the provider's external account can be registered automatically, without specifying the KID or HMAC key.
```
